<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML+RDFa 1.1//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/MarkUp/DTD/xhtml-rdfa-2.dtd">
<html version="XHTML+RDFa 1.1" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
    xml:lang="en" lang="en" >
    <head>
        <link rel="canonical" href="https://archive.danleonard.us/scholarship/coursework/illinois/ANTH/438/motherhood.xhtml" />
        
        <title>
            East African Motherhood after Decolonization
        </title>
        
        <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1" />
        <meta name="robots" content="index, follow" />
        <meta name="keywords" content="Kenya, Tanzania, internet, birth" />
        <meta name="author" content="Dan Leonard" />
        <link rel="me" href="https://danleonard.us/" />

        <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../coursework.css" />
        
        <link rel="webmention" href="https://webmention.io/danleonard.us/webmention" />
        <link rel="pingback" href="https://webmention.io/danleonard.us/xmlrpc" />

        <!-- Google Scholar -->
        <meta name="citation_title" content="East African Motherhood after Decolonization" />
        <meta name="citation_author" content="Leonard, Daniel Glenn" />
        <meta name="citation_author_institution" content="Undergraduate, Department of Anthropology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign" />
        <meta name="citation_publication_date" content="2019/12/13" />
        <meta name="citation_technical_report_institution" content="University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign" />
        <meta name="citation_access" content="all" />
        <meta name="citation_pdf_url" content="https://archive.danleonard.us/scholarship/coursework/illinois/ANTH/438/motherhood.pdf" />
        <meta name="citation_full_html_url" content="https://archive.danleonard.us/scholarship/coursework/illinois/ANTH/438/motherhood.xhtml" />
        <meta name="citation_firstpage" content="60" />
        <meta name="citation_lastpage" content="63" />
        <meta name="citation_numpages" content="4" />
		
		<!-- Global site tag (gtag.js) - Google Analytics -->
		<script async="async" src="https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtag/js?id=UA-56093027-5"></script>
		<script>
  			window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || [];
			function gtag(){dataLayer.push(arguments);}
  			gtag('js', new Date());
			
			gtag('config', 'UA-56093027-5');
		</script>
    </head>
    <body vocab="https://schema.org/">
        <article>
            <header>
                <h1>
                    <span id="title">East African Motherhood after Decolonization</span>
                </h1>
                <a id="pdf" rel="alternate" href="./motherhood.pdf" media="print" type="application/pdf">🖨︎ Printable version (PDF)</a>
                <a id="tex" rel="alternate" href="./motherhood.tex" type="application/x-tex"><span class="latex">L<sup>A</sup>T<sub>E</sub>X</span> source</a>
                <dl id="pageinfo">
                    <dt>Submitted</dt>
                    <dd>
                        <time datetime="2019-12-13T20:35:00-06:00">December 13, 2019</time>
                    </dd>
                    <dt>Author</dt>
                    <dd rel="author" typeof="Person">
                        <span property="givenName">Daniel</span>
                        <span property="additionalName">G.</span>
                        <span property="familyName">Leonard</span>
                    </dd>
                    <dt>Course</dt>
                    <dd typeof="Course">
                        <span property="courseCode">
                            ANTH 438
                        </span> 
                        <span property="name">
                            Primate Life History Evolution
                        </span>
                    </dd>
                    <dt>Institution</dt>
                    <dd typeof="EducationalOrganization">
                        <span property="name">University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign</span>
                    </dd>
                    <dt>Instructor</dt>
                    <dd typeof="Person">
                        <span property="honorificPrefix">Dr.</span>
                        <span property="givenName">Kathryn</span>
                        <span property="additionalName">B.</span>
                        <span property="additionalName">H.</span>
                        <span property="familyName">Clancy</span>
                    </dd>
                </dl>
            </header>
            <section id="introduction">
                <h2>Introduction</h2>
                <p>In <span class="citation" data-cites="Coo08">Lambkin</span>’s (<a class="citation" href="#ref-Coo08" data-cites="Coo08">1908</a>) report on syphilis in the <span lang="lg" xml:lang="lg">Baganda</span><a href="#fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1" role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a> populace, he describes how this <q cite="#ref-Coo08">most naturally civilized, charming, kind, tactful, and courteous of black people</q> (p. 1022) is suffering from exceptionally high rates of syphilis, averaging around half of the entire population. The cause of this epidemic, so tragically inflicted on one of the continent’s less-savage peoples, is blamed squarely on the promiscuity women were free to practice in under the liberation of British colonization. Missionaries had brought Christianity to <span lang="lg" xml:lang="lg">Buganda</span>, freeing women from the tribal yoke of polygamy and subservience and introducing the liberal Western ideals of turn-of-the-century sexuality. Without the country’s former legal punishments for unchastity, they became <q cite="#ref-Coo08">merely female animals with strong passions, to whom unrestricted opportunities for gratifying these passions were suddenly afforded</q> (p. 1023). The solution, he concluded, was in the imposition of Western medicine, specifically outlined in stereotypically British-colonial terms as via the use of local subservient chieftains to control the <span lang="lg" xml:lang="lg">Baganda</span> at large.</p>
                <p><a class="citation" href="#ref-Mus02" data-cites="Mus02">Musisi (2002)</a> outlines how the colonial occupation in <span lang="lg" xml:lang="lg">Buganda</span> utilized the mask of Western medicine to construct the “other” in <span lang="lg" xml:lang="lg">Baganda</span> women while simultaneously using women as the harbinger for civilization and progress. For the colonial medical establishment, the aforementioned promiscuity of <span lang="lg" xml:lang="lg">Baganda</span> women was a cause of the population’s decline, which was expected to result in the nation’s extinction. Doctors of the time used pelvic measurements of <span lang="lg" xml:lang="lg">Baganda</span> women to demonstrate how local customs caused their pelvises to become <q cite="#ref-Coo33">deformed</q> in a way ill-suited for reproduction (<a class="citation" href="#ref-Coo33" data-cites="Mus02">Cook, n.d.</a>; in <a class="citation" href="#ref-Mus02" data-cites="Muf02">Musisi 2002, 100</a>). This crisis of underpopulation was one only for the Western observer, to whom <span lang="lg" xml:lang="lg">Buganda</span> was the height of native civilization – being organized as a monarchy analogous to those of Europe – and one whose extinction would be a loss to anthropology and to the greater colonization efforts in British East Africa. In controlling women’s actions and creating otherized depictions of their bodies, the medical establishment considered themselves to have <q cite="#ref-Mus02">sav[ed] a ‘race’ that was in danger of going extinct</q> (<a class="citation" href="#ref-Mus02" data-cites="Mus02">Musisi 2002, 109</a>).</p>
            </section>
            <section id="the-postcolonial-era">
                <h2>The Postcolonial Era</h2>
                <p>The idea of certain civilizations living “backwards” lives in need of improvement towards the Western ideal carried on through decolonization, and in the middle of the twentieth century became the centerpiece of what would come to be called modernization theory. Thinkers in this school placed the impetus of development – defined as the attaining of a Western industrial state – upon the peoples of the Third World. As <a class="citation" href="#ref-Tip73" data-cites="Tip73">Tipps (1973)</a> identifies, the language of the “savage” and the “civilized man” disappear, yet the ideological foundation of nineteenth-century ethnocentrism remains. Modernization theorists <q cite="#ref-Tip73">continue to evaluate the progress of nations … by their proximity to the institutions of Western, and particularly Anglo-American societies</q> (<a class="citation" href="#ref-Tip73" data-cites="Tip73">Tipps 1973, 206</a>). The new dichotomy is “modern” versus “tradition,” where formerly colonized societies must take it upon themselves to eschew established customs and pull themselves up to the rest of the world.</p>
                <p>The modernization theory’s implications extend far beyond the macroeconomic structure of postcolonial states. Many scholars, dissenting from the neoliberal consensus, have argued that the structural adjustment of the previous half-century has been detrimental to the poorest inhabitants of the developing world in less economically visible ways. <a class="citation" href="#ref-Ear96" data-cites="Ear96">Earth (1996)</a> argues that declines in the provision of social services almost always result in an increased load on women’s labor. Using the example of water infrastructure in decline in Tanzania, she argues that while dehydration impacts men and women equally, it is women who make up for lack of water sources by traveling to retrieve for their children potable water: the reallocation of social resources <q cite="#ref-Ear96">contain[s] an implicit assumption that the process of social reproduction which is carried out by women <em>unpaid</em> will continue regardless of the way the resources are allocated</q> (p. 124, emphasis original).</p>
                <p>Discussion of the birth experience in sub-Saharan Africa rarely avoids addressing health education in the region. Sex education in postcolonial Africa is frequently a top-down approach, mediated by the UN and national governments, supplanting traditional forms of education. However, for many African women, this messaging rarely reaches them for reasons of parental inhibitions (<a class="citation" href="#ref-Mbu07" data-cites="Mbu07">Mbugua 2007</a>) or lack of funding (<a class="citation" href="#ref-Agb11" data-cites="Agb11">Agbemenu and Schlenk 2011</a>). For a third of women, initial knowledge about the pregnancy and birth process comes from firsthand experience of witnessing birth rather than from friends, doctors, or teachers (<a class="citation" href="#ref-Cha90" data-cites="Cha90">Chalmers 1990</a>). As literacy and internet access have improved, so has access to sex education for many East Africans (<a class="citation" href="#ref-Mee95" data-cites="Mee95">Meekers 1995</a>). However, the focus of international and governmental agencies toward funding programs such as provisioning family planning supplies does not address the spread of misinformation about such supplies (<a class="citation" href="#ref-Chi10" data-cites="Chi10">Chipeta, Chimwaza, and Kalilani-Phiri 2010</a>). Notably, the most frequently-visited page on the Swahili Wikipedia every month since January 2016 has been “<span lang="sw" xml:lang="sw">Ufahamu wa uwezo wa kushika mimba</span>” (trans, “fertility awareness”) (<a class="citation" href="#ref-Wik" data-cites="Wik">Wikimedia Foundation, n.d.</a>). The page has since 2014 contained sections on the differing motility of X- and Y-chromosome-containing sperm cells (<a class="citation" href="#ref-Ufa141" data-cites="Ufa141">Wikipedia contributors 2014</a>), a belief for which no evidence has been found (<a class="citation" href="#ref-Hos01" data-cites="Hos01">Hossain, Barik, and Kulkarni 2001</a>). Efforts to encourage education in developing nations must consider the diverse ways in which people in a very heterogenous part of the world gain their information and adapt to those challenges rather than top-down approaches.</p>
                <p>Although education is certainly a laudable goal, the evidence-based scientific establishment is not beyond reproach. Focuses on maternal health often exist only as a proxy for concern over potential children. While some work has been done to generate a holistic view of how community factors impact the health of infants (<a class="citation" href="#ref-Mag00" data-cites="Mag00">Magadi, Diamond, and Madise 2000</a>), <a class="citation" href="#ref-Rei19" data-cites="Rei19">Reiches (2019)</a> describes how Western scientists’ focus on a child’s growth serves to instrumentalize the mother’s body. While not as dehumanizing as the colonial-era pelvic measurements, the Gambian study she describes serves a similar function in both removing African women’s agency and in maintaining Western conceptions of the female body.</p>
                <p>In my own work on poverty amongst persons with disabilities in Kenya (<a class="citation" href="#ref-Leo19" data-cites="Leo19">Leonard 2019</a>), a refrain I found frequent was the intersection of disability and single-motherhood. Nearly every mother I spoke to in a disability community described having had their male partner flee upon news of a pregnancy, leaving them to take care of the child. While considering the state of single-motherhood as a “problem” in itself (<a class="citation" href="#ref-Oma95" data-cites="Oma95">for an example, see Omari 1995</a>) ignores women’s autonomy to choose their family planning, the mothers I spoke to were unanimous in describing their intersecting hardships of motherhood and disability. Women with disabilities are rarely able to find independent employment, and social services in Kenya are so lacking for both people with disabilities and single mothers that most in the community I worked with never left abject poverty.</p>
                <p>Another notable dynamic of postcolonial motherhood is the development of long-distance alloparenting. The mechanization of agriculture and simultaneous urban development brought by globalization have all but required many Tanzanians to seek work not in their pastoralist villages but in the growing cities (<a class="citation" href="#ref-Coc19" data-cites="Coc19">Cockx et al. 2019</a>). <a class="citation" href="#ref-Kyo15" data-cites="Kyo15">Kyomugisha (2015)</a> describes how Tanzanian mothers – unable to support their children in the expensive cities to which they gravitate – often leave children behind with grandparents or other kin, who alloparent while the mother either gains a stable footing or remits money back to the children and their caretakers. At the most extreme end, this distant mothering becomes transnational, where African mothers move to Western nations in a search for enough money for the allocare of their children. Such distant separation, which <a class="citation" href="#ref-Kyo15" data-cites="Kyo15">Kyomugisha (2015)</a> found could be up to seven years, was emotionally difficult for these mothers, with one describing her coping strategy as <q cite="#ref-Kyo15">work[ing] so hard that I don’t have idle time to think about how I miss my children</q> (p. 82).</p>
                <p>While decolonization has brought with it an end to chattel-style control of East African populations, mothers have still faced hardships in navigating a rapidly changing world. The exploitation of women’s bodies in the name of science continues, albeit in a more humane form. International and national efforts to manage population overlook women’s actual needs and desires, preferring the provisioning of condoms at public restrooms to real culturally-sensitive education that takes persons with disabilities into account. Western economic hegemony in the neocolonial era requires mothers to rely on allocare just to gain access to the labor market. Even in the face of these intersecting challenges, mothers in East Africa continue to persist and make difficult decisions for themselves and for their children. An approach to development and aid in this region must take mothers’ perspectives into account.</p>
            </section>
            <section id="references">
                <h2>References</h2>
                <ol id="refs" class="references hanging-indent" role="doc-bibliography">
                    <li id="ref-Agb11">
                        <p>Agbemenu, Kafuli, and Elizabeth A. Schlenk. 2011. “An Integrative Review of Comprehensive Sex Education for Adolescent Girls in Kenya.” <em>Journal of Nursing Scholarship</em> 43 (1): 54–63. doi:<a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1547-5069.2010.01382.x">10.1111/j.1547-5069.2010.01382.x</a>.</p>
                    </li>
                    <li id="ref-Cha90">
                        <p>Chalmers, Beverly. 1990. <em>African Birth: Childbirth in Cultural Transition</em>. River Club, South Africa: Berev Publications.</p>
                    </li>
                    <li id="ref-Chi10">
                        <p>Chipeta, E. K., W. Chimwaza, and L. Kalilani-Phiri. 2010. “Contraceptive Knowledge, Beliefs and Attitudes in Rural Malawi: Misinformation, Misbeliefs and Misperceptions.” <em>Malawi Medical Journal</em> 22 (2): 38–41. doi:<a href="https://doi.org/10.4314/mmj.v22i2.58790">10.4314/mmj.v22i2.58790</a>.</p>
                    </li>
                    <li id="ref-Coc19">
                        <p>Cockx, Lara, Liesbeth Colen, Joachim De Weerdt, and Sergio Gomez Y. Paloma. 2019. “Urbanization as a Driver of Changing Food Demand in Africa: Evidence from Rural-Urban Migration in Tanzania.” EUR 28756 EN. Luxembourg: European Union; Publications Office of the European Union. doi:<a href="https://doi.org/10.2760/515064">10.2760/515064</a>.</p>
                    </li>
                    <li id="ref-Coo33">
                        <p>Cook, Albert Ruskin. n.d. “The Influence of Obstetrical Conditions on Vital Statistics in Uganda.” <em>The East African Medical Journal</em> 9: 327.</p>
                    </li>
                    <li id="ref-Ear96">
                        <p>Earth, Barbara. 1996. “Structural Adjustment and Its Effects on Health and Education in Tanzania.” <em>Canadian Woman Studies</em> 16 (9): 122–28.</p>
                    </li>
                    <li id="ref-Hos01">
                        <p>Hossain, Amjad M., Sailen Barik, and Pandurang M. Kulkarni. 2001. “Lack of Significant Morphological Differences Between Human X and Y Spermatozoa and Their Precursor Cells (Spermatids) Exposed to Different Prehybridization Treatments.” <em>Journal of Andrology</em> 22 (1): 119–23. doi:<a href="https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1939-4640.2001.tb02161.x">10.1002/j.1939-4640.2001.tb02161.x</a>.</p>
                    </li>
                    <li id="ref-Kyo15">
                        <p>Kyomugisha, Florence. 2015. “Transnational Mothering: The Meaning of African Immigrant Women’s Lives.” In <em>Black Motherhood(s): Contours, Contexts and Considerations</em>, edited by Karen T. Craddock, 71–86. Bradford, Ontario, Canada: Demeter Press.</p>
                    </li>
                    <li id="ref-Coo08">
                        <p>Lambkin, F. J. 1908. “Syphilis in Uganda.” <em>The Lancet</em> 172 (4440): 1022–3. doi:<a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(01)60252-6">10.1016/S0140-6736(01)60252-6</a>.</p>
                    </li>
                    <li id="ref-Leo19">
                        <p>Leonard, Daniel Glenn. 2019. “Challenges Faced Following Termination of Persons with Disabilities Froma Segregated Workshop in Mombasa, Kenya.” Undergraduate Research Symposium; University of Illinois.</p>
                    </li>
                    <li id="ref-Mag00">
                        <p>Magadi, Monica, Ian Diamond, and Nyovani Madise. 2000. “Individual and Community Level Factors Associated with Premature Births, Size of Baby at Birth, and Cesarean Section Deliveries in Kenya.” African Population &amp; Health Research Center; Population Council.</p>
                    </li>
                    <li id="ref-Mbu07">
                        <p>Mbugua, Njeri. 2007. “Factors Inhibiting Educated Mothers in Kenya from Giving Meaningful Sex-Education to Their Daughters.” <em>Social Science &amp; Medicine</em> 64 (5): 1079–89. doi:<a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2006.10.008">10.1016/j.socscimed.2006.10.008</a>.</p>
                    </li>
                    <li id="ref-Mee95">
                        <p>Meekers, Dominique. 1995. “Education and Adolescent Fertility in Sub-Saharan Africa.” In <em>Woman and African Society</em>, edited by Man Singh Das and Vijay Kumar Gupta, 163–209. New Delhi: M. D. Publications.</p>
                    </li>
                    <li id="ref-Mus02">
                        <p>Musisi, Nakanyike. 2002. “The Politics of Perception or Perception as Politics? Colonial and Missionary Representations of Baganda Women, 1900-1945.” In <em>Women in African Colonial Histories</em>, edited by Jean Allman, Susan Geiger, and Nakanyike Musisi, 95–115. Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University Press.</p>
                    </li>
                    <li id="ref-Oma95">
                        <p>Omari, C. K. 1995. “Modern Family Planning, Sexual Behavior and Marriage Status Among Women in Tanzania.” In <em>Woman and African Society</em>, edited by Man Singh Das and Vijay Kumar Gupta, 43–56. New Delhi: M. D. Publications.</p>
                    </li>
                    <li id="ref-Rei19">
                        <p>Reiches, Meredith W. 2019. “Reproductive Justice and the History of Prenatal Summplementation: Ethics, Birth Spacing, and the ‘Priority Infant’ Model in the Gambia: Winner of the 2019 Catharine Stimpson Prize for Outstanding Feminist Scholarship.” <em>Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society</em> 45 (1): 3–26. doi:<a href="https://doi.org/10.1086/703493">10.1086/703493</a>.</p>
                    </li>
                    <li id="ref-Tip73">
                        <p>Tipps, Dean C. 1973. “Modernization Theory and the Comparative Study of Societies: A Critical Perspective.” <em>Comparative Studies in Society and History</em> 15 (2): 199–226. doi:<a href="https://doi.org/10.1017/S0010417500007039">10.1017/S0010417500007039</a>.</p>
                    </li>
                    <li id="ref-Wik">
                        <p>Wikimedia Foundation. n.d. <em>Topviews Analysis</em>. <a href="https://tools.wmflabs.org/topviews/">https://tools.wmflabs.org/topviews/</a>.</p>
                    </li>
                    <li id="ref-Ufa141">
                        <p>Wikipedia contributors. 2014. “<span lang="sw" xml:lang="sw">Ufahamu Wa Uwezo Wa Kushika Mimba</span>.” In <em>Wikipedia (Swahili Language)</em>. Wikimedia Foundation. <a href="https://sw.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ufahamu_wa_uwezo_wa_kushika_mimba&amp;oldid=929590#Kama_njia_ya_kupanga_jinsia_ya_mimba">https://sw.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ufahamu_wa_uwezo_wa_kushika_mimba&amp;oldid=929590#Kama_njia_ya_kupanga_jinsia_ya_mimba</a>.</p>
                    </li>
                </ol>
            </section>
            <footer class="footnotes" role="doc-endnotes">
                <hr />
                <ol>
                    <li id="fn1" role="doc-endnote">
                        <p>
                            This name follows Bantu ethnic group naming customs. An individual is “<span lang="lg" xml:lang="lg">Muganda</span>,” the people “<span lang="lg" xml:lang="lg">Baganda</span>,” their language “<span lang="lg" xml:lang="lg">Luganda</span>,” and the country “<span lang="lg" xml:lang="lg">Buganda</span>”<a href="#fnref1" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a>
                        </p>
                    </li>
                </ol>
            </footer>
        </article>
    </body>
</html>